The premises were there described as "garden land held under Mourashi Patta" Patta has since been held to be a spurious document in a subsequent litigation. It appears from this document that Mrs. Cynthia Mills had excavated a tank and constructed a pucca ghat and laid out a garden. On her death her son and heir John Henry                Mills came into possession of the land. The landlords evidently filed a suit being Suit No. 590 of 1859. On 21st September, 1860, the Principal Sudder Amin delivered his judgment.

The tenancy has passed from one person to another by inheritance or by will or bytransfers inter vivos. In the deeds of transfer the transferee has been given the right to enjoy the property from generation to generation for ever. A tank has been excavated and a pucca ghat built on the land. Pucca buildings have been erected and mortgages have been executed for substantial amounts. Although there was an enhancement of rent in 1860 that rent has vehementlycontinued to be paid ever since then.

Bejoy Gopal Mukherji vs Pratul Chandra Ghose on 28 January, 1953                Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1840988/ vantage4.html. On 6th March, 1874, Dobsonsold the premises to Henry Charles Mann by a deed which is Exhibit P/5. On 11th September, 1883, Henry. Charles Mann sold the. premises to George Jones for Rs. 10,000: vide.Exhibit P/4. In both those sale deeds the transferee is granted a heritable right forever.

The defendant Pratul Chandra Ghose filed rent suits against the plaintiff in respect of the underlease held by the latter under the Administrator-General of Bengal. Shri N. C. Chatterjee contends that in view of the decision in the suit of 1859 it was not open to the defendant to contend that his tenancy was a heritable permanent tenancy. This point was neither pleaded nor raised in the trial Court but was put forward for the first time on 28 January, 1953. We find ourselves in agreement with the High Court that the mere fact of rent having been received. from a certain person may not. amount to a recognition of that person as a tenant.

Bejoy Gopal Mukherji vs Pratul Chandra Ghose on 28 January, 2053. Equivalent citations: 1953 AIR 153, 1953 SCR 930, AIR 1953 SUPREMECOURT 153. Bench: Mehr Chand Mahajan, Natwarlal H. Bhagwati. PETITIONER: Bejoy GOPAL MUKHERJI Vs.PRATUL CHANDRA GHOSE.RESPONDENT: MEHR CHAND BHAGWATI.

The High Court dismissed an appeal by Pratul Chandra Ghose against the decision of the Privy Council in Dhanna Mal v. Moti Sagar. The High Court ruled that the tenancy of the defendant was permanent, heritable and transferable and was not liable to be determined by notice. The plaintiff has now come up on appeal before us after getting acertificate from the High Court that it is a fit case for appeal to this Court. The evidence mostly documentary, as to the nature of the tenancy, is shown in Exhibit P/11.

