The case was brought by Syed Qasim Razvi against the State of Hyderabad. The case was heard in the Supreme Court of India. The court ruled that the conviction of Razvi could not stand because of discrimination in the trial process. Razvi was sentenced to life in prison but the sentence was later overturned on appeal. The Supreme Court ruled that Razvi's conviction should be quashed because the trial had been 'vitiated' by the 'discriminatory' procedure followed.

A trial cannot be legally Continued after the Constitution on the basis of a law which offends the fundamental provisions of the Constitution. A law is either constitutional or not and its validity or otherwise cannotdepend on what has been accomplished under its provisions. The discriminatory provisions  stood in the way of the petitioners even after the 26th of January, 1960, and prevented them from exercising their right to apply for bail, for transfer or for revision. The conviction of the  petitioners was subsequently illegal.

The direction to try "any offence" must. mean a direction totry an offence described as such in the Hyderabad Penal Code, no matter. by whom it is committed and not an offence committed by any particular person which is a case. We see no force in this argument. It has conceded by Mr. Peerbar Ali Khan and Mahbat-hoy Khan that the cases of Khadar Ali. Khan, Hazi Khan, Mahbat Khan and Syed Nazir Ali stand on the same footing as Qasim Razvi.

This argument, in our opinion, is based upon a misconception. It appears from section 355 of the Hyderabad Criminal.Procedure Code that there are second appeals allowed under the. Hyderabad law. It is said that the case could have been tried by the District Magistrate and in that case the accused could have one appeal. to the Sessions Judge and a second one to the High Court. This contentionrests on a pure speculation and is hardly tenable. In our opinion the position here is materially different from that in Anwar Ali Sarkar's case (1)

The cases against the petitioners, who were charged  with rioting, dacoity, arson and other offences, were,  directed  to be tried by the Special Tribunal on October 6, 1949. The accused appealed to the Supreme.Court and also applied under art. 32 of the Constitution  of India for quashing the orders of the High Court,  and  the Special. Tribunal became void on the 26th January, 1950, as its provisions contravened articles 14 and 21 of the. Constitution, which came into force on that date.

Syed Qasim Razvi vs The State Of Hyderabad And Others(And... on 19 January, 1953)Equivalent citations: 1953 AIR 156, 1953 SCR 589, AIR 1953 SUPREMECOURT 156. Author: B.K. Mukherjea. Bench: Ghulam Hasan, M. Patanjali Sastri, N.Chandrasekhara Aiyar, Vivian Bose. PETITIONer: SYED QASIM RAZVI.RESPONDENT: The State of Hyderabad.

The committal proceedings are undoubtedly eliminated but it has been brought to or notice by the learned Advocate- General appearing for the State of Hyderabad. The preliminary enquiry before committal is not compulsory under the Hyderabad Criminal Procedure Code. The court can also under theordinary law exclude members of the public or particular persons from the court room. The continuance of a trial in the absence of the accused when the court is satisfied that the accused himself to impede the course of justice is another special feature of the trial before the Special Tribunal.

Local inspection is contained in section 528 of the Hydersbad Code which corresponds to section 539A of the Indian Code. It is important to note that the Hyderabad Code does not say anything about giving notice to the parties before holding any local inspection. The omission of the provisions relating, to revision,and transfer in the Regulation apparently seem to be discriminatory, but even on this point the grievance of the appellant appears to be moreimaginary than real. The allegations were want of jurisdiction of the, Special Court and also irregularity of the trial.

Trial of Syed Qasim Razvi and others began on 5th December 1949. The trial proceeded up to 26th January 1950, when the Constitution came into force. The defendants were convicted on 11th September, 1950, and their convictions, were upheld on appeal by the High Court of Hyderabad on 13th April, 1951. The question is whether it could be validly continued by the same tribunal and under the same procedure after that date. If not, I cannot see how a conviction can be based after the Constitution on a procedure which is abhorrent to its fundamental chapter.

Syed Qasim Razvi vs The State Of Hyderabad And Others(And... on 19 January, 1953) Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1063853/8that the evidence should be taken down in extensor In the case before us it is admitted that evidence was recorded in full and the procedure followed was, the warrant and not the summary procedure. Mr. Peerbhoy argues that a law, which allows the. summary procedure to be followed or the.recording of evidence to be dispensed with at the discretion of the court is prima facie.discriminatory.

In Lachmandas's case it was assumed throughout that it was not possible to proceed with the trial without following the discriminatory procedure. As that procedure became void on the coming into force of the                Constitution, the jurisdiction of the Special Judge practi- cally came to an end. Whether this assumption was well-founded or not it is not profitable for us to discuss at the present stage. We may mention here that the impossibility of giving the accused the substance of a trial according to normal procedure at the subsequent stage may arise not only from the fact that the discriminatory provisions were not severable from the rest of the Act.

The case was brought before the Special Tribunal under the Hyderabad Criminal Procedure Code. The use of the English language during the trial is not at all discriminatory as we have already said. The trial was expected to take a considerable period of time before it could be completed. There was no occasion for holding the trial in the absence of the accused ; the appellant did not want to be present and he gave a note to the tribunal to state that he wanted to state. The Regulation authorises the accused to go on with the trial on a trial in his absence, but only when it is satisfied that the absence has been brought about by the accused himself.

It is said further that they were both ignorant of the English language in which the proceedings were conducted, that the presiding Judge Mr. Pinto did not understand Urdu and consequently they had no opportunity of making themselves heard. Without entering into the truth or otherwise of these allegations, it would be enough to state that they do not involve any constitutional point. The direction to conduct proceedings in English does not per se offend against the provision of article 14 of the Constitution. The preliminary points raised in these appeals are overruled and the appeals would be posted for hearing on their merits in the usual course. The application under article 32 will stand dismissed.

The High Court by its judgment dated the 13th of April, 1951, allowed the appeal to this extent only, namely, that it acquitted the accused of the charge. The records of the appeal have not been printed as yet, but in the mean time the appellant presented an application under article 32 of the Constitution praying for a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the orders of the High Court. As the trial became bad in law after 26th of January, 1950, the resulting conviction and sentence were, it is said, illegal also, and the appellant is                entitled to be released from his imprisonment '

J.-Syed Qasim Razvi was one of the accused in what is, known as the Bibinagar dacoity case. The case took place within the State of Hyderabad and in which, according to the prosecution, a party of armed Razakars committed robbery, looting, arson, assault and other violent acts. The trial commenced before the Special Tribunal on 24th October, 1949, and on that day the Special Public Prosecutor opened the case on behalf of the prosecution. The cross examination of 18 prosecution witnesses was finished before the 26th of January, 1950, and the rest of the witnesses were cross-examined after that date.

Section 3 of the Regulation might be in conflict with the provision of article 14 of the Constitution, but as has been held by this court in Keshavan Madhava Menon's case (1), the effect of article 13 (1) of the. Constitution is not to obliterate the entire operation of the 'inconsistent laws or to wipe them out. from the statute book. Such laws must be held to be valid for all past transactions and for enforcing rights andliabilities accrued before the advent of. the Constitution. On this principle, the order made by the Military Governor, referring this case to the Special Tribunal, cannot be impeached.

Lachmandas ruled that the application of the 'discriminatory procedure' after the date of the Constitution constituted a breach of the fundamental right to freedom of speech. He said that the law was not intended to be applied to cases brought before the Special Court after the 26th January, 1950. The law was intended to apply only to those cases brought after that date, not to those brought before it after. Lachmanda said that if the law had been applied to all cases before then, it would not have been a breach.

Syed Qasim Razvi vs The State Of Hyderabad And Others (And... on 19 January, 1953) was a landmark case in the history of Indian law. The case involved the setting up of a special court in Hyderabad, India. The court was set up to try cases transferred from the ordinary courts to a Special Tribunal. The judges were selected from a class of judicially qualified and experi- enced men of recognised impartiality. The judge found that the court was not enamoured of discrimination in the fact that the proceedings were conducted in English, whereas Urdu is the language of the courts.

There is no general procedure of trial by Jury or with the aid of assessors in the State, but it is open to the Government to exercise its powers and direct that any particular class of cases shall be tried. The Code which was referred to us was in Urdu but the only section which specifically refers to Urdu is section 230. It is not improbable that the court language is Urdu which was the language of the ruling class. The right to ask for bail is excluded by section 6, sub-section (2) of the Regulation.

The money and time which would be wasted were my view to prevail would be unfortunate but all that is part of the price to be paid for the maintenance of the principles which our Constitution guaranteed. The Regulation forbids all this and, therefore, in the words of themajority decision in Lachmandas's case(1), the Special Judge's jurisdiction came to an end. The discrimination lies in the trial itself, or the continuation of it, and the accused does not have to wait until its conclusion on the ground that he might after all be acquitted or granted a nonappealablesentence.

Mr. Justice Das examined the provisions of the Act in detail, summarising the position at page 726 as follows. After holding that there was no nexus which connected the basis on which the supposed classification was founded, he went on to observe that there can be no justification for a rational basis of classification. He concluded that the special procedure prescribed by the impugned Act constitutes adeparture from the ordinary law of procedure and is detrimental to the interest of the persons subjected to it and as such is discriminatory.

There was no basis, much less any reason, for the exceptional treatment given to Syed Qasim Razvi. Mr. Peerbhoy attacked the following provisions of the Regulation as discriminatory. The right of the Special Tribunal to take cognizance of offences without the accused beingcommitted to it for trial. There is no provision that the trial shall be held with the aid of jury or with assessors. English shall be the language of the Tribunal. Evidence shall not be taken down at length, but only a memorandum of the substance of the evidence shall be prepared.

He was convicted on September 11, 1950, and wassentenced to 7 years' rigorous imprisonment under section 330 of the Hyderabad Penal code. Similar sentences were passed against the co- accused. Their convictions and sentences we upheld on appeal by the High Court atHyderabad on, April 13, 1951. In August, 1951, they obtained leave to appeal to this court under article 132 and 134 of the Constitution. While these appeals were pending and the record was in thecourse of preparation, Razvi filed a petition under article 32 of the constitution praying for the issue of a writ of certiorari. The petition challenges RegulationV of 1358-Fasli, as having become void after the 26th of January, 1950.

The West Bengal Special Courts Act has been struck down by the Supreme Court of India. The law gives unrestrained power to the State to select in any way it likes the particular cases or offences which should go to a Special Tribunal. The right of revision to the High Court does not exist at all under the new procedure, although the Constitution of India are retained. The Act is so in its effect and operation, inasmuch as it vests in the executive government unregulated official discretion, and therefore has to be judged unconstitutional.

The accused were convicted by a Special Court appointed under section 5 (1) of the West Bengal. Special Courts Act No. X of 1950. The Full Bench of the Calcutta High Court which was moved by. the accused under article 226 for the issue of a writ of certiorari to quash. the conviction held that the Special Court had no jurisdiction to try the case. On appeal by the State the majority of six learned Judges of this court upheld the view. The observations of the learned Judges constituting the majority deal with the contentions raised in the present case.

One of the appellants knows English but at least one does not and a third has only a smattering knowledge of it. In Hyderabad the court language in practice is Urdu and so great is the importance attached to it that neither judges nor counsel are permitted to function there unless they know that language. The President of the Tribunal himself did not know Urdu. I am -unable to brush this aside as a matter of no consequence. It is to my mind material and vital and cuts at the root of this,, trial. I find it impossible to say that this is not discrimination within the meaning of article 14 and it is unacceptable that the discrimination continued after the Constitution.

Section 20 of the Code lays down that no sentence passed by a Sessions Judge shall be enforced. Section 7, sub-section (2) of theRegulation, excludes the power of confirmation by any authority whatsoever. Mr. Peerbhoy, counsel for the petitioner, strongly relies upon the case of Lachmandas Kewalram Ahuja v. The State of Bombay (1) in support of his contention that the impugned Regulation is void under article 14. The case should be decided in accordance with the principles laid down by the majority in that case.

Syed Qasim Razvi vs The State Of Hyderabad And Others. (And... on 19 January, 1953) Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1063853/                2828                28                 28                 28. The case was dismissed on February 27, 1950, but the learned. Chief Justice said that he saw no reason to interfere at the "stage" of the appeal. It is clear that the discriminationcontinued after the Constitution came into force and such continuation of the discriminatory procedure to their cases after the date of the Constitution.

Chandrasekhara Aiyar J.-Preliminary inquiry before committal to the sessions, trial by jury or with the aid of assessors, the right of a de novo trial on transfer of a case from one court to another, have been taken away from the accused. "Bose J.-We find men accused of heinous crimes called upon to answer for their lives and liberties. We find them picked out from their fellows, and however much the new. procedure may give them a few crumbs of advantage, in the bulk they are deprived of.substantial and valuable privileges of defence" Syed Qasim Razvi vs The State Of Hyderabad And Others.

